In this video you're going to learn how you can insert documents into Mongo D.B. now at the end of the
last video we touched on that briefly by using insert one to insert our very first document.
But in this video we'll dive into insert one in a bit more detail and you'll also learn how you can
insert multiple documents at the exact same time.
This video also includes a challenge where you're gonna have to insert some documents into a brand new
collection.
Let's go ahead and kick things off by continuing our discussion of insert one as you likely guessed
insert one is not synchronous.
It is indeed asynchronous.
Now currently we don't have a callback registered because it's not completely necessary for the data
to actually get inserted but it is necessary if we want to handle errors or confirm that our operation
worked as expected.
So this is something we definitely want to do in a production application right here we're going to
pass a second argument to insert one a callback function which is going to get called when the operation
is complete.
Now the callback function for insertions gets called with one of two potential arguments.
We either have the error if things went poorly or we have the result.
If things went well now the result contains some interesting information including the operation result.
So that's going to contain our data as well as the unique I.D. that was assigned to the document.
So let's go ahead and actually fill out the callback function down below to do something meaningful.
I'm going to set up an if condition and to check if there is an error if there is one.
I will return.
Well printing a message like we've done up above for connection errors and right here I'll just say
something like unable to insert user.
Let's go ahead and spell insert correctly though.
Now if things did go well the code down below will run and we're going to dig into result.
There's basically only one property on result we're ever going to end up using and that is UPS O P S
this contains all of the documents that were inserted in this case just one.
So let's go ahead and dump that to the console console log result dot ups.
So right here we are printing ops which is an array of documents in this case an array with just one
document inside.
Now what I'm going to do is save Mongo D.B. Dutton J.S. with our callback function in place and from
the terminal will restart things I'll use control C to shut it down and the up arrow key and enter to
restart it.
And right here we can see that basically instantly we're getting our output from the insert one operation.
I have an array with a single object inside since we inserted just a single document and we have three
properties I have name Andrew age 27 and our underscore I.D. property with a unique identifier for that
document.
Now if you're wondering how I knew that result has ups this is where the API documentation comes into
play the documentation for this particular module the Mongo D.B. NPM module is quite extensive and it's
super useful.
So over in the browser we had pulled that up a bit earlier in the other tab.
It was this documentation on the left hand side we have all sorts of interesting things.
So for example if I scroll down to M we have Mongo client if I click on that we can learn how to use
it.
And one of the methods on mongo client is Connect which we already used.
If I click on that it talks about exactly how we can use connect.
So we have the U.R.L. as that first argument then we have options as the second argument.
You can see all of the options available right here and what exactly they do.
And then down below near the bottom of that list of options we can see we also pass in a callback function.
Now for our purposes using insert one we don't want to look at Mongo client.
We want to scroll down to collection when we go to collection.
We're gonna be brought over to the documentation for that and under methods we have all of the collection
methods we can access including the one that we've used insert one I'm going to click on that so we
can view the documentation for it.
We can see that the first argument is the document to insert we've already provided that the second
argument is an optional options object which we have left off.
And the third argument all the way down at the bottom.
This is our callback.
Now if you want to learn more about how callback is going to function when using insert one there is
a link right here you can follow to see what arguments your callback is going to get called with.
I click it.
It brings me over to the documentation for that.
I get an error I get a result.
And those are the two arguments we've set up for our callback in insert one.
So that is where these two come from.
They come from the documentation.
Now you're wondering what exactly is on the result or error for that matter.
Well you can click those to see what you get.
Right here I'm going to click next to result to bring me over to the documentation for that.
And here I can view the five properties I have access to when working with result including the one
we used.
UPS I can see ops is an array and that array contains all of the documents that have been inserted.
And it lists out some various methods including insert one which is the one that we've just used.
We also have other properties available but none of them contain any particularly useful information.
The only ones you might end up using are inserted count which contains the number of documents inserted
and inserted I.D. which contains the idea of the document you inserted.
But as we've already seen that I.D. is also available on ups since we're seeing it over here when we
dump ops to the console.
So this is insert one in a nutshell it allows you to insert a single document into a collection.
Now we're gonna go ahead and comment this code out and we're going to look at how we can bulk insert
documents instead of inserting just one user.
We're going to insert two at the exact same time for this we will once again need to get a reference
to the collection that's D.B. dot collection passing in the collection name.
I still want to insert into that user's collection so let's type it out exactly.
Then instead of using insert one we're gonna go ahead and use insert many now insert many is also listed
over in the documentation.
So once again we want to look at the documentation for collection go to methods and then go down to
I for insert many and it's sitting right here just before insert one we can click that to learn how
it's used right here.
It expects the first argument to be an array of documents to insert.
Then we have our options which we're not going to specify and down below we have our callback.
So using the documentation we can get a feel for exactly how this works over inside of Mongo D.B. J.
S..
Let's go ahead and use it.
I'm going to call insert many passing in an array for that first argument and we're gonna provide to
new users right here.
I'll go ahead and add a another user with the name Jen and I'll set her age equal to 28 and then we
can add a second object to this array to insert a second document at the same time right here a second
object name.
I'll go ahead and use Gunther and for age I'll go ahead and use twenty seven.
So the following insertion will insert two documents as opposed to just inserting the one.
Now let's go ahead and set up that callback function once again.
So right here after the closing for the array the second argument is going to be that callback function
and once again we can refer to the documentation to figure out how things work.
And the reason I'm bringing you over to the docs so many times is that it's really important to get
comfortable using them so you can explore new features and customize everything to fit your needs.
So right here insert many we go down to callback we click the option next to it to view what we get
we get an error and a result like we did before and we can also click this to view what we have on their
result.
And right here we have the same stuff.
The only difference is that we have inserted ideas plural since we are writing multiple documents.
Let's go ahead and actually fill out the callback.
We're gonna get a potential error and a potential result.
And like we did above we will handle that error and right here we're gonna go ahead and print that message.
I'll return and use console log on.
Able to insert documents as my message and if things went well I will just print ops which is an array
of the documents that were inserted right here.
That would be console log result dot ops.
Perfect.
Let's go ahead and actually test things out so I'm going to save Mongo D.B. and from the terminal I'm
going to shut things down now before we actually run the program.
I'm gonna pull up rowboat 3 T as well that's sitting over here and the last time that we ran it we had
just a single document inside of there.
I can go ahead and refresh the page by either right clicking users and clicking view documents or using
command R or control R depending on your operating system.
And here I can see that I do have two documents the two users that I inserted with the exact same information
since I had ran these same insert one command twice.
Now from here we're going to actually run the new file with insert many getting called for the first
time down below up and enter to rerun the last command and I can see that Ops is an array with two documents.
I have Jen who's 28 with her unique I.D. and I have Gunther who's 27 with his unique I.D. over inside
of robo 3 T.
I can refresh things to view those records as well.
And now we have four documents in that user's collection.
Now that you know how to use insert and insert many it's time for a challenge over inside of Mongo D.B.
adopting J S I'm gonna start by commenting out the call to insert many.
So it doesn't run when we rerun this file and down below I'm gonna paste the challenge comments describing
what I'd like it to do.
I'll go ahead and indent these properly making things easier to read.
So your goal is to add some code right here inside of the Connect callback.
So right where we were adding our other calls to insert one and insert many and your job is to insert
three tasks into a new tasks collection.
So we have the user's collection with some data inside of there.
You'll be creating that tasks collection and inserting some data you're going to use insert many to
insert that should say three teenage R E documents.
And for each document you want to have a description which will be a string and they completed status.
True if it's completed or false.
Otherwise for your three documents.
Make sure to have a few different completed values.
As an example make two completed and one incomplete or make two incomplete and one complete switch things
up a bit though.
Next up.
Step two.
You want to set up the callback for your insert.
Many call to handle any potential errors or to print the ops if things went well similar to what we've
done before.
Then you're actually going to run the script and finally you're going to view the data in robo 3 T.
You can refresh the database to view the new collection and you can view all of the data for that collection
to make sure you're seeing your three tasks show up.
Take as much time as you need to knock this out test your work and when you're done come back and click
play
how'd that go.
Let's go ahead and kick things off.
The first thing we need to do is use insert many.
We know that we have to use D.B. dot collection to figure out which collection we're trying to insert
the documents into.
In this case I've decided to call it tasks.
Next up on that collection will be using insert many to insert many documents in this case we're going
to insert three.
The first argument is the array of documents right here.
Let's go ahead and set up three objects.
I'm gonna have my first object with a description which will be a string.
And I'm also going to have a completed value and that's going to be a Boolean true if the task is complete
or false.
Otherwise right here let's go ahead and pick a task description for this one.
I'll use something like clean of the house which we just did so I can leave that as true.
Then I'll go ahead and add a couple of other documents so I have description.
I'll go ahead and say renew inspection.
I have not done that for my motorcycle so that's going to be false.
And one more document.
The third document description I'll go ahead and say something like pot plants.
I got some new plants for the office.
Currently they're not in their pots.
I want to go ahead and fix that but I haven't done it so far so completed can be false.
So here we have some dummy data you could have picked any 3 description and completed values you liked.
You did not need to have the same text as long as you had three objects with both description and complete
it from here.
We want to move on to Step Two and set up the callback to handle errors or to print the operation output.
So I'll provide that callback as the second argument to insert many we know we get error and we know
we get results.
We're gonna check if there is an error first.
If error what do we do we'll go ahead and set up a code block to run and we will use return to stop
the function execution and I'll use console dialog to print a message unable to insert tasks or any
other message would have worked.
Next up if things did go well I just wanted you to print the operation output which as we've done before
is console dialog printing.
Result dot ups.
Excellent.
So that is the steps 1 and 2 step 3 is to run the script.
So I'm gonna save the script.
I'm gonna shut down the existing process with control C use up and enter to restart it.
And right here I can see that I have three items showing up in that OPs array which is coming from the
console dialog online.
Sixty eight I have clean the house renew inspection and pot plants showing up correctly all with unique
I.D..
Now we can move on to the final step which is step 4.
We want to refresh the database and view our data before I do that.
I'll remove the challenge comments since we're all done with them and I'll shift over to robo 3.
Now here we don't have the collection showing up but if I right click and click refresh we can open
up.
Task Manager and we can now see we do have that second collection tasks and I can view the data inside
of there.
All right click it click view documents.
And right here we have our three documents showing up.
If I want to see them at a quick glance I can switch over to that table view and I can view all of them.
I have ideas for all of them.
I have the correct descriptions and I have the completed values everything showing up correctly.
So there we go.
We now know how to insert documents into the database from here.
We're going to talk about one of the other CRUD operations.
So we've knocked out create which is C. We're gonna talk about Reed.
How do we get documents out of the database so we can use them.
We're gonna talk about that in the next video.
So let's go ahead and jump right in.